== Third Rails - Rails 3.0 Sample Application

The original Third Rails was created by @josevalim and it is available here:

  http://github.com/josevalim/third_rails

It has very specific goals:

* showcase Rails 3.0 new folder structure
* demonstrate the usage of custom generators

This application is fully self-contained. In this fork I've done:

* vendorized all needed gems
* updated the railties files to the latest version

== Gem Bundler

If you want to use the newest gem dependency manager support, you have 
to install a separate gem called Bundler, from @wycatz, available here: 
http://github.com/wycats/bundler

  sudo gem install bundler

All the necessary gems are already vendorized under vendor/gems and if
the gem has executables, they will be at <tt>bin/</tt>, such as the
'spec', 'rails' commands and others. Check out the next section.

== Using Third Rails

There are 2 ways to use this project: with shared gems, or local gems.

The simple approach right now is to just do this:

  git clone git://github.com/akitaonrails/third_rails.git

You need to have the Rails source project somewhere as well:

  git clone git://github.com/rails/rails.git
  cd rails
  git submodule init
  git submodule update

Now edit the <tt>Gemfile</tt> inside the 'third_rails' project you just
cloned and change the variable <tt>rails_source_path</tt> in the first
line to the correct path of your Rails source project. After that you
can do:

  cd third_rails
  gem bundle

This will vendorize all needed gems inside the project's <tt>vendor/gems</tt> folder
so everything works smoothly. You need to install the Bundler gem, see the 
previous section.

Talking to @josevalim he clarified what would be the easy way to just test
this app and to create your own test bed. Again, you will need the Rails source project:

  git clone git://github.com/rails/rails.git
  cd rails
  git submodule init
  git submodule update
  gem bundle

Bundler will create a <tt>vendor/gems</tt> folder inside the Rails source project,
then you need to edit the <tt>config/boot.rb</tt>, specifically this first line:

  environment = File.expand_path('../../vendor/gems/environment', __FILE__)

Replace the path for the correct path to your gems folder inside the Rails project.
If you do this for every Rails 3 project, you will reuse the same gems. For example,
my Rails project is in this path: <tt>~/Sites/rails/rails/vendor/gems/environment</tt>

But there is a caveat: it will override the <tt>Gemfile</tt> in your project. So you
won't be able to have project specific gems. So this is not good enough for normal
development, but will do to quickly create a test project.

== Rails 3.0 First Impressions (by @AkitaOnRails)

There are new files available in the structure:

* Gemfile - that's where you configure all the needed gems
* config.ru - Rails fully supports Rack, and from now on, even script/server
  bootstraps using Rack

The good old <tt>config/environment.rb</tt> is now lighter and it basically
depends on a new file called <tt>config/application.rb</tt>. So, whatever you
used to do in environment.rb you should now to at application.rb

All the old 2.x Rails generators will not work, so Rspec, Cucumber, and any
other gem that supported generators will have to rewrite them to the new
style which depends on Thor. In this project you can see how they will look
like: take a look in <tt>lib/generators</tt> for examples. There you will find
RSpec and DataMapper custom generators.

If you want to use this project to start your own new Rails 3 project, don't 
simply copy it. The new <tt>config/application.rb</tt> file declared a new
class called <tt>ThirdRails</tt>, which is the name of your application, 
and several other files expect to find this constant. So you need to update
the following files to the new constant if you change the name of the app:

  config/application.rb
  config/environment.rb
  config.ru
  script/console
  script/dbconsole
  script/server

It is well known that the Routes engine received a lot of attention and it
also sports a refined DSL. Check out <tt>config/routes.rb</tt> as there are
examples of usage. Basically, they rely on blocks instead of hashes now, so
the old style would be:

  map.resources :posts, :member => { :first => :get }

And the new style becomes:

  resources :posts do
    member do
      get :first
    end
  end

Much cleaner if you ask me. Also don't forget the the Controller was also
heavily revised and now supports @josevalim's Inherited Resources style.
Check out his plugin to learn it today:

  http://github.com/josevalim/inherited_resources/

Just for now, there seems to be a glitch in the new Routing DSL. If I do
<tt>map.resources :people</tt> everything works correctly. If I use the
new <tt>resources :people</tt>, then pluralization gets messed up and I
end up having routes like <tt>/peoples</tt>. It's probably gonna be 
fixed before release.

Rails now will bundle other 3rd party gems. It already had tztime for Time
Zone support, Rack, and now Thor for the generators. Another interesting
one is "Arel", described as "Relational Algebra for Ruby" or a way to write
cleaner and more expressive SQL queries in Ruby style. Worth checking out
its documentation. I didn't peek into ActiveRecord and ActiveModel but I
bet they are replacing its own internal SQL handling for Arel:

  http://github.com/nkallen/arel/

Rails is highly modularized now. You have the bare bone "Rails Metal" and
you can even build a small Sinatra-like micro-framework as @wycatz explained:

  http://yehudakatz.com/2009/08/26/how-to-build-sinatra-on-rails-3/

ActiveRecord and ActiveResource have also received a lot of love and the
result is the extraction of ActiveModel as a separate project so you can build
Model-like classes that do not rely neither on a database table or web service
and still have all the validations, filters and other goodies.

If you're a DataMapper, Sequel or other ORM developer, take a look into the
<tt>ActiveModel::Lint::Tests</tt> module inside the Rails/ActiveModel project.
They delineate the requirements for you to create a thin adapter layer for your
ORM so Rails can transparently use it. 

== You want to start a project from scratch

When Rails 3 gets released you can simply do:

  sudo gem install rails
  rails my_project

But, while it doesn't happen, you need to go straight to the source, so, again:

  git clone git://github.com/rails/rails.git
  cd rails
  git submodule init
  git submodule update

From within the Rails project folder, you can create a new project 
like this:

  ruby railties/bin/rails /path/to/new/project
  /path/to/new/project

Now, it is a good time to change your Rails Gemfile content for this:

  rails_source_path = "/Users/akitaonrails/Sites/rails/rails/"
  
  gem "rake", ">= 0.8.7"
  gem "mocha", ">= 0.9.8"
  
  gem "rails", "3.0.pre", :path => "#{rails_source_path}railties"
  %w(activesupport activemodel actionpack actionmailer activerecord activeresource).each do |lib|
    gem lib, '3.0.pre', :path => "#{rails_source_path}#{lib}"
  end
  
  # AR
  gem "arel", "0.2.pre", :git => "git://github.com/rails/arel.git"
  gem "sqlite3-ruby", ">= 1.2.5"
  
  # AP
  gem "rack", "1.0.1", :git => "git://github.com/rails/rack.git"

Again, change the <tt>rails_source_path</tt> to the path of the Rails source
project you just cloned. Once you do it, you can choose to vendorize these gems 
into your project like this:

  gem bundle

Do not forget to install the bundler gem first, as I mentioned before.
This will vendorize the gems inside your own project. If you don't want to duplicate
your gems all the time, read the 'Using Third Rails' section above to
understand how to have a shared gems repository within your Rails source project.

If everything goes fine, you should be able to start using the usual
Rails commands:

  script/generate
  script/console
  script/server

This should make you prepared to start learning Rails 3. And if you
are a Gem or Rails Plugin developer: *NOW* is the time to start
updating and testing your projects!! Remember: a *lot* has changed
under the hoods, so if your project rely on *any* monkey-patching
you must re-test it against Rails 3 because it will most certainly
break. If your project as generators, learn how to rewrite them.

Cheers

== Extras

There is a custom generator for DataMapper to illustrate how other
ORMs can also have Rails-like generators. Problem is, up to this
point it is not yet clear to me how to Wrap DataMapper as an ActiveModel
object. There will be a clear way to do it, but I have to research
more how (anyone?)

I've also added a still in development new plugin called Responder, 
form the Plataforma Tec guys. This is a scaffold generator to create
thinner controllers using <tt>respond_with</tt> instead of the usual more
verbose <tt>respond_to</tt> version that is the Rails default.

The included example controller was already generated that way and if you
want to use this new generator, do this:

  git submodule update --init

== Authors

* José Valim (http://blog.plataformatec.com.br/)
* Fabio Akita (http://www.akitaonrails.com)